ipfs in web apps guide (#1970)
ipfs/ipfs-docs: docs/how-to/ipfs-in-web-apps.md

---
title: IPFS in web applications
description: How to develop applications that use IPFS in web browsers, including IPFS retrieval and pinning in browsers using implementations such as Helia.
---

# IPFS in web-applications and resource-constrained environments

> In this guide you will learn how to use IPFS in web applications, including addressing, retrieving, and providing.

Author: ```suggestion
In this guide you will learn how to use IPFS using JavaScript/TypeScript in web applications, including addressing data with CIDs, retrieval by CID, working with CAR files, and the the nuances of providing.
```

> In this guide, you will use [Helia](https://github.com/ipfs/helia), the most actively maintained TypeScript IPFS library for use on the web and the recommended library for most use cases.

Author: ```suggestion
For this, you will use [Helia](https://github.com/ipfs/helia), the most actively maintained implementation of IPFS in TypeScript for use on the web.
```

> **Note:** this guide is focused solely on using IPFS for data within a web application. It does _not_ cover using IPFS for static website distribution with IPFS Gateways.

## Challenges with IPFS on the web

IPFS allows you to fetch data by CID from multiple providers without being reliant on a single authoritative server.

However, making all of this work on the web is tricky due to networking constraints. Browsers impose many restrictions on web apps, for example, opening TCP/UDP connections is not possible. Instead, web apps are constrained to HTTP, WebSockets, WebRTC, and most recently WebTransport.

There are good reasons for this like security and resource management, but ultimately, it means that using IPFS on the web is different to native binaries.

## Key IPFS operations: Addressing, Retrieving, and Providing

As a developer, IPFS exposes three main operations for interacting with the network:

> - **Addressing data with CIDs** (also known as merklizing): taking arbitrary data and encoding so its addressable by CID. For example, given a file and encoding it so it can be addressed by a CID.

Author: I don't think there is an accepted spelling. Both seem pretty common.

- [merklize](https://github.com/search?q=merklize&type=code) 
- [merkleize](https://github.com/search?q=merkleize&type=code)

- **Retrieving data by CID**: given a CID, IPFS finds providers (peers who share the block), connects to them, fetches the blocks, and verifies that the retrieved data is what the CID represents.
- **Providing data by CID**: making data addressed by a CID retrievable by other peers, either by running a node or with a pinning service.

## Addressing data by CID

As mentioned above, the first step in the [lifecycle of data in IPFS](../concepts/lifecycle.md) is to address it by CID.

When addressing data by [CIDs](https://proto.school/anatomy-of-a-cid/03) you will need to choose:

> - [hash function](../concepts/glossary.md#hash-function). For use in browsers, the default and recommended hash function is `sha2-256` which is also the default for [helia](https://github.com/ipfs/helia).

Reviewer: I think we treat is as a proper noun:

```suggestion
- [hash function](../concepts/glossary.md#hash-function). For use in browsers, the default and recommended hash function is `sha2-256` which is also the default for [Helia](https://github.com/ipfs/helia).
```

- [multicodec](../concepts/glossary.md#multicodec), which is the format of the data you are addressing and is used to help decode data. CIDs support a wide range of multicodecs, but for most intents and purposes, you will likely either want use:
  - [UnixFS](../concepts/file-systems.md#unix-file-system-unixfs) for files and directories.
  - [dag-cbor](../concepts/glossary.md#dag-cbor) for json-like structured data with binary encoding. DAG-CBOR is an extension of CBOR that adds a "link" type for CIDs, allowing for the creation of interlinked CBOR objects (which can be used to form larger linked data structures).

### CID Determinism

> One important thing to note is that **the same data can result in different CIDs** depending on a number of factors, including the hash function, the multicodec you use, and the multicodec. **This is especially true for files**, where the same file, hash function and multicodec can still result in different CIDs depending on the different options that UnixFS supports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One important thing to note is that **the same data can result in different CIDs** depending on a number of factors, including the hash function, and the multicodec you use. **This is especially true for files**, where the same file, hash function and multicodec can still result in different CIDs depending on the different options that UnixFS supports.
```

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning you can also have different DAGs made from the same file optimised for download speed vs random access (e.g. video seek)?  Maybe too low level, IDK.

<iframe height="300" style="width: 100%;" scrolling="no" title="Addressing an object by CID with Helia and dag-cbor" src="https://codepen.io/2color/embed/xbKpJKx?default-tab=js%2Cresult" frameborder="no" loading="lazy" allowtransparency="true" allowfullscreen="true">
  See the Pen <a href="https://codepen.io/2color/pen/xbKpJKx">
  Addressing an object by CID with Helia and dag-cbor</a> by Daniel Norman (<a href="https://codepen.io/2color">@2color</a>)
</iframe>

### Example: Addressing a file by CID with unixfs

<iframe height="500" style="width: 100%;" scrolling="no" title="Addressing an image by CID with Helia and UnixFS" src="https://codepen.io/2color/embed/zxONqPj?default-tab=js%2Cresult" frameborder="no" loading="lazy" allowtransparency="true" allowfullscreen="true">
  See the Pen <a href="https://codepen.io/2color/pen/zxONqPj">
  Addressing an image by CID with Helia and UnixFS</a> by Daniel Norman (<a href="https://codepen.io/2color">@2color</a>)
</iframe>

## Retrieval

From a high level, there are several ways to retrieve data with IPFS in web applications:

> - Using the [`Verified Fetch`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@helia/verified-fetch) library, which was modelled after the `fetch` API and returns `Response` objects, with the main difference being that it allows you to fetch data by CID, abstracting away the details of content routing, transports and retrieval. For more examples and background see the [release blog post](https://blog.ipfs.tech/verified-fetch/).

Reviewer: Maybe link to MDN here?

```suggestion
- Using the [`Verified Fetch`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@helia/verified-fetch) library, which was modelled after the [fetch](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Fetch_API) API and returns [Response](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Response) objects, with the main difference being that it allows you to fetch data by CID, abstracting away the details of content routing, transports and retrieval. For more examples and background see the [release blog post](https://blog.ipfs.tech/verified-fetch/).
```

> - Using the [`helia`](https://github.com/ipfs/helia/) library, which is the foundation for the `verified-fetch` library, and provides a more comprehensive and modular API for interacting with the IPFS network, beyond just retrieval.

Reviewer: Proper nouning

```suggestion
- Using the [`Helia`](https://github.com/ipfs/helia/) library, which is the foundation for the `verified-fetch` library, and provides a more comprehensive and modular API for interacting with the IPFS network, beyond just retrieval.
```

> - Using public recursive gateways, e.g. `ipfs.io` with HTTP. This is not recommended for most use cases, because it forgoes the verifiability and trustlessness enabled by content addressing. Granted, it might be the easiest way to retrieve data in a web application, but is also the most fraught with security and centralization concerns.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to mention that our goal is to push away from public backend infrastructure like this and that we aim more toward trustless gateways?

Author: We should link to the gateways page which is pretty up to date with these nuances. Also are you refering to trustless gateway **providers** or just **recursive trustless gateways**?

Reviewer 2: Our team goals include moving away from recursive trustless gateways, but we will probably always run a trustless gateway provider. I'd have to defer to Lidel/Adin for a 5-10-year plan. We don't need to mention it if it's that far ahead. 

My main point was that, besides informing the readers that it's not recommended, we should also indicate that we are "tightening our purse strings" regarding hosting those services.

Reviewer 3: Probably work for future PR. 

Virtually all pages that touch gateways needs to be redone, we have too many pages with partial and often outdated info (created before https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/ existed).

### Example: Image retrieval with Verified Fetch

<iframe height="500" style="width: 100%;" scrolling="no" title="Fetch an image on IPFS Mainnet @helia/verified-fetch" src="https://codepen.io/2color/embed/QWXKZGx?default-tab=js%2Cresult" frameborder="no" loading="lazy" allowtransparency="true" allowfullscreen="true">
  See the Pen <a href="https://codepen.io/2color/pen/QWXKZGx">
  Fetch an image on IPFS Mainnet @helia/verified-fetch</a> by Daniel Norman
</iframe>

## Providing data

For data to be retrievable by other peers on [IPFS Mainnet](../concepts/glossary.md#ipfs-mainnet) it will need to be uploaded to a pinning service or an IPFS node.

> When possible, it's best to rely on client-side merklization to address data by CID and then upload it to a pinning service or a node. [CAR files](#car-files) are a great way to do this, though they are not supported by all pinning services.

Reviewer 2: I feel like we need a better term to use than merklization and merkleizing

Reviewer 2: nothing better.. but normalizing on spelling and things would be good. I feel like i've seen it so many different ways.

Author: Yeah, I've stuck consistently to **merkleizing** and made sure we use it consistently.

> When possible, it's best to rely on client-side merklization to address data by CID and then upload it to a pinning service or a node. [CAR files](#car-files) are a great way to do this, though they are not supported by all pinning services.

Author: ```suggestion
When possible, it's best to rely on client-side merkleization to address data by CID and then upload it to a pinning service or a node. [CAR files](#car-files) are a great way to do this, though they are not supported by all pinning services.
```

So why would you want to use CAR files?

One of the main reasons is related to [CID determinism](#cid-determinism). As mentioned above, the same data can result in different CIDs, which can make it difficult to verify data without its content addressed representation. By packaging up the data into a CAR file, you can upload the CAR to multiple pinning services and nodes knowing they are providing the same CIDs

Car files are a great way to store content-addressed data in a way that is easy to transport and store, and Helia (and other implementations) allow you to both export and import any data you've addressed by CID into a CAR file.

<iframe height="300" style="width: 100%;" scrolling="no" title="CAR export with Helia and dag-cbor" src="https://codepen.io/2color/embed/EaYoegX?default-tab=js%2Cresult" frameborder="no" loading="lazy" allowtransparency="true" allowfullscreen="true">
  See the Pen <a href="https://codepen.io/2color/pen/EaYoegX">
  CAR export with Helia and dag-cbor</a> by Daniel Norman (<a href="https://codepen.io/2color">@2color</a>)

> </iframe>

Reviewer 2: it feels like this ends abruptly.

Author: Yeah I'll add a summary

---
title: IPFS in web applications
description: How to develop applications that use IPFS on the Web including addressing by CID, merkleizing, retrieval, providing, and CAR files with Helia.
---

> # IPFS in web-applications and resource-constrained environments

Author: ```suggestion
# IPFS in web applications and resource-constrained environments
```

> In this guide you will learn how to use IPFS using JavaScript/TypeScript in web applications, including addressing data with CIDs, retrieval by CID, working with CAR files, and the the nuances of providing.

Author: ```suggestion
In this guide you will learn how to use IPFS using JavaScript/TypeScript in web applications, including addressing data with CIDs, retrieval by CID, working with CAR files, and the nuances of providing.
```
